---
layout: post
title: Eve Online API and Discord
---

## What Is Eve Online?

If you haven't heard of Eve Online, it is a Massively Multiplayer Online space 
sandbox game.  Sand box games are games where you can generally do about 
whatever you want which makes eve a very unique game.  There are various 
YouTube channels and Twitch streams showing gameplay, and if you want to 
check the game out, go visit it's [website](https://www.eveonline.com/) where 
you can download and play for free.  With a bit of googling, you can even 
get Eve running in Linux via WINE.

Anyway without getting too far into everything you can do in Eve, I want to 
give a brief explanation about how some pieces of the game work.  

Eve allows for a variety of gameplay.  Players can battle other ships, they 
could be other players ships, and they could be their own ships.  They often 
fly in big groups called fleets, but some players prefer to play alone.  At the 
core, Eve is based on getting ships to battle other ships.

But the content in Eve is not soley on fighting.  No, where do all the ships 
come from?  Eve, in my opinion, can bost of having the most complex and best 
in game economy.  To build a ship alone, a player needs to find a blueprint for 
that ship, mine minerals and refine them based on the ships requirements, and 
then build the ship.  The same is true for any equipment mounted on the 
ship.  ALMOST everything in Eve is built by players and, just like our friend 
Adam Smith showed us, specialization is more efficient.  This opens up Eve to 
more options.  Players will mine in large fleets, other players will by all the 
minerals and refine them, then sell them to other players who will make ships 
and equipment.  Everything has a price based on time, availability and risk.

Eve also has an extremley large universe players can fly in.  There are over 
one thousand different mapped star systems, and hundreds more which are 
unmapped and can be found from Wormholes.  Transporting goods becomes 
valuable.  Not all systems are the same though.  Some systems have in game 
non player police (Concord) which will come defend ships if they are 
attacked.  Other systems have nothing.  And this difference in freedom is what 
brings risk.  With more risk comes more reward.

## The API

As you can tell from the section above, Eve is a complex game.  There is tons 
of information that has yet to really be dug into, and some players (and 
non-players) will joke that Eve is a spread sheet simulator.  The market 
especially has tons of room for automation and analyzation.  

CCP Games knows this as well, and, while a player can copy past some 
information directly out of the game and into a spreadshseet, if they want to 
compare data across systems that quickly becomes a hassle.  So we get an API 
which provides almost any information a player might want to know right to 
their greasy fingers.  

Check out the [Eve Swagger Interface](https://esi.evetech.net/ui/), an API 
that contains a ton of useful information.  I quickly found I also needed a 
bit of extra static data, the [Static Data Export](https://developers.eveonline.com/resource/resources) provided by eve has all the item and system names 
matched to their ID, which is used in the api.

I'm not going to talk too much about the actual routes of the API.  They are 
documented well enough on their website that they are not too hard to figure 
out.  I will call out a few of the high level routes which I think are 
pretty useful.  They also outline some pojects I'd like to work on in the 
future.

Fleets: It would be cool to write a bot that automatically organizes fleets for 
a player.  This would be especially useful in large corperations, or streamers 
who want to invite viewers to their fleet.

Market:  This one might seem obvious but the options here are much larger than 
I have seen used.  Not only can all the data be down to find out how much your 
stuff is worth before you transport it there to sell it, or to find the 
cheapest place to buy your next lazer gun.  I think the best use will be 
pulling in resourse information and calculating the items with the best 
turnover given the current market.  Everything from cost of materials, to 
manufacturing costs, and price to sell could be calculated to optimize the 
players time.  

## Discord Travel Bot

When I was actually playing eve activly, I played with players who lived in 
wormholes.  These are unmapped systems, and the only way to get in, or out is 
to find the wormhole, and then jump through it.  Some general information about 
where you will come out is provided but nothing too specific.  Especially if 
you want to get somewhere specific; like the closest trade hub to sell off all 
that rare loot you found before someone comes by and tries to kill you for it.

There are tools which help for mapping wormhole systems and networks, and an 
ingame route calculator that tells you the distance from your current system 
to a gien system, but no way to know how far one random system is to 
another.  This was the question we were always asking, and when good exit's 
were found everyone would report the results on our Discord.  Why not automate 
this process?

On the whole it was a rather simple project, but I was unfamiliar with the 
API routing and the data.  I decided it was a good starting point.  

The first thing I needed to do was grab the static data from the SDE.  After 
all, the routes were all based on ID's not names.  The SDE universe data is 
organized in a series of directories with yaml files.  You have to work down 
from region, to constellation, to solar system.  In each directory there 
is a file with the information.  I wrote some code to yank out the data I 
wanted and stored it all in a mongo database so I could look it up 
later.  There are over a thousand files to read, and on my laptop with an NVME 
it still took about 10 minutes to open and close them all and drop the data 
into mongo.  Good thing it only had to happen one!

Once the data all existed the project was easy to complete.  The 
process was pretty streight forward:
1. Pass in the source and destination names to the bot.
2. Look up the id's for the two systems from the mongo database.
3. Make an Eve API request for the route from one to the other.
4. Look up the system names (and security status) for each system returned by 
the API. 
5. Print the results back to the user.

I also added an option to see the distance from a system to the four major 
trade hubs.  Not only did I want to know how far I would have to travel to 
sell my loot, I wanted to know which system was the closest before I left.

## Discord

Discord is a chat room program that with built in voice.  It's quickly becoming 
the most popular way for gamers communicate and organize.  They provide their 
own API for connecting but I used the 
[Python Discord API](https://github.com/Rapptz/discord.py) to connect the 
travel code I had written to Discord.  Both the Discord API and the python 
wrapper are documented pretty well, so I'm not going to get too into creating 
the code.  

The long and the short of it is, you create a client, add your authorization 
token (you can get it when you register the bot) and tell it to run.  Then you 
can pull the client id and URL for connecting and add the bot to servers 
you have permissions on.  

There is a lot of a lot of existing bots; most 
people seem interested in playing music in their channel.  It's effective but
it seems like they could do so much more.  One of my friends has written a bot 
which connects to the Player Unknown's Battle Grounds (PUBG) API and queries 
the match results after each game.  He's integrated it with a number of API's 
to pull out cool information, [it's over here](https://github.com/nluedtke/brochat-bot)
I'd like to see more bots utilizing these API's to create useful tools 
instead of just playing music.

My time spent playing eve has decreased to almost zero, but the bot is still 
in use, and gets about ten requests a day, nothing special.  But it also only 
sits on a It's currenly running on a 
raspberry pi sitting in my living room.  If you want to see the code, 
[check it out](https://github.com/asbalderson/eve-project).  It's in desperate 
need of a restructure.
